---
title: 'Website, First Post, Mission'
date: 2025-04-08
permalink: /posts/2025/04/08/post0/
tags:
  - random
---

My professional (with a hint of personal) website is up!


For a long time, I was thinking about setting up my own website for various reasons including professional self-development, and personal. I had a simple working website based on a popular HTML5 UP template based on a personal website workshop I attended a couple of years ago but it was a bit difficult to customize...

Recently, I helpd set up our lab's website ([NCS Lab](https://networked-control-systems-lab.github.io/)) using AcademicPages template. I liked the looks, and most importantly, I got used to it. 

So here it is. This is my own personal + professional website, and I am quite satisfied with the layout so far.

Every so often, I will write a brief blog post. The primary motivation for this activity is <em>Education</em> but really for educating myself. For this reason, I am going to excuse myself, and select topics based on my preferences, and adopt styles I like. After all, I am under no obligations, right?

Today we have a vast number of avaialble resources at our fingertips literally. Many of them are super high-quality, written by some super smart people! These ideas being available online, accessible (at least physically) to almost anyone, and anywhere in the world at any points in time is already a remarkable gift to our generation!

Still, I’ve found that some of these resources feel "mentally" inaccessible. It’s not the fault of the teachers---they just often can’t see how hard it is for others to understand what came easily to them. And many are simply too busy, pushed by society toward profit-generating work instead of thoughtful teaching.

So, here’s my ambitious little mission: I want to make advanced technical knowledge not just physically available, but mentally accessible to anyone who’s genuinely curious. If no one else benefits, at least I hope it helps a past version of myself. But ideally, it helps others too—especially those who’ve felt the same frustrations I’ve had.

One of my ambitious personal missions (perhaps lifetime) is to make advanced technical knowledge mentally (not just physical) accessibile to anyone who is genuinely curious and eager to learn. If not for the society, it should at least benefit my past self who struggled; but I do sincerely hope that it helps others too, especially those who feel the same frsutrations I've had.

This motivates me to focus on clarity and communication. I know I won't always succeed, and I am sure I will fail often. But if anything I write is unclear, I'd love to hear from you, and I will do my best to improve.